---
layout: post
title: My Pong Replica
feature-img: "img/pong.png"
thumbnail-path: "img/pongpetit.png"
short-description: The arcade classic with sounds!
---

### Pong!

This is a project made with pure JavaScript and the  HTML5 canvas element to recreate the arcade classic.  

Play my finished game [here!](https://robotmermaid.github.io/pong/)  

I had been wanting to using canvas for a long time and so I was excited at this project and it turned out to be much fun.  
It was one of the last projects I did at Bloc and so had very little in the way of instructions. They mostly gave us guidelines and links. Some of which I have included here.

### User Stories  

*As a player, I want to see a Pong table, two paddles, and a ball.  
*As a player, I want to control the position of a paddle with arrow keys.  
*As a player, I want the ball to bounce off the paddles and two sides of the table.  
*As a player, I want to play against a computer opponent.  
*As a player, I want to see the score update live.  
*As a player, I want the game to end when a player scores 11 points.   

### The Process   

#### Getting the Pieces in Canvas   

First I had to create a table in the view with Canvas.  
Bloc provided [this tutorial](http://diveintohtml5.info/canvas.html) and several from
[here.](http://www.html5canvastutorials.com/tutorials/)   
The important part is to define a context in your canvas or you will just have a boring box sitting there. The context is what you manipulate to get all the action. You move to a certain spot within it and start a line or some text...

Then I had to create the paddles.   
These would need to move up and down when triggered by the arrows keys but stay along the side of the field.
I used an object constructor to create the prototype for a Paddle. This paddle would move along the y axis at a certain x point.

````
    var Paddle = function Paddle(xpos, ypos, width, height, speed) {  
      this.xpos = xpos;  
      this.ypos = ypos;  
      this.height = height;  
      this.width = width;  
      this.speed = speed;  
    };
````

There would be, in the end, a player paddle and a computer paddle which was automatic. Having a prototype allowed me to create as many paddles as I wanted. The prototype only contained the basic info that is true for all the paddles.  

Now for the ball which was also created from an object constructor. It would have to move all around the context and bounce against whatever it 'hit'. Which called for a collision function.

First I had to render the prototypes using the ``render()`` function creating actual objects for both paddles and the ball. I used the ``this`` keyword so each paddle would know it's own values.

````
    Ball.prototype.render = function() {
      context.beginPath();
      context.arc(this.centerX, this.centerY, this.radius, 0, 2 * Math.PI, false);
      context.fillStyle = 'darkBlue';
      context.fill();
    };
````

The``window.onload`` would trigger the render function into action and the x and y pos would be fed into the objects.  

####  Now for the animation   

To get all of this moving we used [requestAnimationFrame.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame)  

The window needed to continuously render during the game to keep the movements looking realistic.
We achieved this with an ``animate()`` function which called ``requestAnimationFrame`` on the ``window`` object.
Since ``requestAnimationFrame`` calls a callback function (in our case ``step()``) 60 times per second, we get our smooth animation effect. The ``step()`` function is where all the action will be contained. The ``animate()`` function will be placed inside the function listening for the key events so we can get the action at the right time.   

````
// called inside the keyListener function
    var animate = window.requestAnimationFrame ||
                  window.webkitRequestAnimationFrame ||
                  window.mozRequestAnimationFrame    ||
                  window.oRequestAnimationFrame      ||
                  window.msRequestAnimationFrame     ||
                  function(callback) { window.setTimeout(callback, 1000/60) };  
````
We had of course to include the various vendor versions of requestAnimationFrame to make the gameplay experience the same in different browsers. The final anonymous function is a catch-all that will run if a browser doesn't support any of the instances of ``requestAnimationFrame``.  

This article helped us understand it better [animation in web games](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Games/Techniques/Efficient_animation_for_web_games

````
    // callback for animate function
      function step()  {
          context.clearRect(0,0,canvas.width, canvas.height);
          drawLine();
          ball.move();
          collision();
          updateComputer();
          ball.render();
          computer.render();
          paddleR.render();
          updateScore();
          if (gamePlaying) {
            animate(step);
          };
    };
````       

The ``step()`` callback routine had to itself call ``requestAnimationFrame()`` to animate another frame at the next repaint and keep the animation rolling. Lastly, the animation needs an initial trigger, the ``window.onload``.

It's such a thrill when it all starts to move : It's Alive!

### Movement  

#### Animating the Paddle

I had to call ``.addEventListener()`` on the window object to listen for the player's key presses. Using Mozilla's event reference to identify the event name to use for the listener, I found the up and down arrow key unicode values: 38 and 40. These were fed into the ``move()`` function to get the paddle's y-position to increase or decrease.
The `addEventListerner()`` on the window element watched for keydown events.


#### Animating the ball  

The ball has a speed and a direction that needed to be built according to the changing variables of the paddles and the borders.  It had to reverse direction on impact which was accomplished with a simple:   

````
    ball.speedX = ball.speedX * -1;
````

The difficult part was identifying when the collision happened.

#### Detecting Collision  

This was the hardest part - mostly because I declared width and height in the wrong order and so my paddles were behaving very strangely. Luckily this error was pointed out to me and I was able to continue with my sanity restored.  
This link [2D collision detection.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Games/Techniques/2D_collision_detection) and much research got me through this part as well as the invaluable help of my mentor.  

````
    var collisionCheck = function(paddle, axis) {
      var widthheight = axis == "x" ? "width" : "height";
      var centerRect = paddle[axis + "pos"] + paddle[widthheight] / 2;
      return Math.abs(ball["center"+axis.toUpperCase()] - centerRect);
     };    

````

  this checks to see how far the paddles and the ball are from each other's center line   

````
    (distXpaddle < (paddleR.width/2 + ball.radius) && distYpaddle < (paddleR.height/2 + ball.radius))
````

#### Computer paddle   

The AI moves the computer's paddle via this algorithm.  
Which is simply making the paddle follow the ball instead of the key strokes.  

````
    computer.ypos = ball.centerY-speedComp;
````

#### Game Over  

  To set an end to the game all I had to do was watch for the ``gamePlaying`` variable. It is originally set to ``false`` so that you can trigger the game to start and becomes ``true`` when the key listener event (the space bar) is triggered. It gets set to ``false`` again when the score reaches 11 and a message gets displayed announcing who won. The score increments every time the ball hits the wall behind either paddle. The computer will sometimes be a little slow so that the player can win.

  I didn't feel the game was complete without some sound effects. Searching the web I found some neat sounds to give the whole thing a sense of the arcades of yore, in my own style.


    that's all
