---
layout: post
title: Pong Replica
feature-img: "img/pong.png"
thumbnail-path: "https://d13yacurqjgara.cloudfront.net/users/3217/screenshots/1686132/webflow_landingpage_1x.jpg"
short-description: Pong replica with sounds!

---
#Pong!
This is a project made with pure JavaScript and the  HTML5 canvas element to recreating the arcade classic.
[Play here!](https://robotmermaid.github.io/pong/)
I had wanted to try using canvas for a long time and so I was excited at this project and i turned out to be fun It was one of the last projects I did at Bloc and so had very little in the way of instructions. They mostly gave us guidelines and links Most of which I have included here.

##User Stories
*As a player, I want to see a Pong table, two paddles, and a ball.
*As a player, I want to control the position of a paddle with arrow keys.
*As a player, I want the ball to bounce off the paddles and two sides of the table.
*As a player, I want to play against a computer opponent.
*As a player, I want to see the score update live.
*As a player, I want the game to end when a player scores 11 points.

##The Process
###Getting the pieces in canvas
First I had to create a table in the view with Canvas.
[this tutorial](http://diveintohtml5.info/canvas.html)
[and several from here](http://www.html5canvastutorials.com/tutorials/)
Then create the paddles
which would need to move when triggered by the arrows
we used an object constructor  to create the prototype for a Paddle

````
var Paddle = function Paddle(xpos, ypos, width, height, speed) {  
  this.xpos = xpos;  
  this.ypos = ypos;  
  this.height = height;  
  this.width = width;  
  this.speed = speed;  
};
````
there was to be a player and the computer
Now for the ball which was also created from an object constructor
the we rendered the prototypes using the ``render()`` function
creating objects for both paddles and the ball
window.onlaod to call the render function

````
Ball.prototype.render = function() {
  context.beginPath();
  context.arc(this.centerX, this.centerY, this.radius, 0, 2 * Math.PI, false);
  context.fillStyle = 'darkBlue';
  context.fill();
};
````

###Now for the animation  
We used [requestAnimationFrame](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/window/requestAnimationFrame)
The game view needs to continoulsy render during gameplay.
We achieved this with an ``animate()`` function which called ``requestAnimationFrame`` on the ``window`` object.
SInce ``rAF`` calls a callback 60 times per second we get a smooth animation effect

````
var animate = window.requestAnimationFrame ||
              window.webkitRequestAnimationFrame ||
              window.mozRequestAnimationFrame    ||
              window.oRequestAnimationFrame      ||
              window.msRequestAnimationFrame     ||
              function(callback) { window.setTimeout(callback, 1000/60) };
````

The various vendor versions of requestAnimationFrame aim to make the gameplay experience the same in various browsers. The final anonymous function is a catch-all that will run if a browser doesn't support any of the instances of  requestAnimationFrame.
This article helped us understand it better [animation in web games](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Games/Techniques/Efficient_animation_for_web_games)

The callback that you pass to animate() will perform the actions that need to occur for each repaint. Write a new function that will act as animate's callback. This function is commonly named step.

````
// callback for animate function
  function step()  {
      context.clearRect(0,0,canvas.width, canvas.height);
      drawLine();
      ball.move();
      collision();
      updateComputer();
      ball.render();
      computer.render();
      paddleR.render();
      updateScore();
      if (gamePlaying) {
        animate(step);
      };
};
````       

Your callback routine must itself call requestAnimationFrame() if you want to animate another frame at the next repaint.
The callback, step, must call requestAnimationFrame(), or animate() in this case, to continuously repaint the view, and vice versa.

Lastly, the animation needs an initial trigger, such as when the window first loads.

It's such a thrill when it all starts to move : It's Alive!
###Movement

####Animating the Paddle
Call .addEventListener() on the window object to listen for the player's key presses. Refer to Mozilla's event reference to identify the event name to use for the listener. To check for the down and up arrow keys, refer to JavaScript key codes.
addEventListerner  for keystrokes defined by their unicode value
[hihi](http://keycode.info/)
####Animating the ball
the ball has a speed and a direction that needed to be built according to the changing variables of the paddles and the borders.  It had to reverse direction on impact which was accomplished with a simple    

````
  ball.speedX = ball.speedX * -1;
````

####Detecting Collision
This was the hardest part - mostly because I declared width and height wrong and so my paddles were behaving very strangely. and nothing made sense. Luckily this error was pointed out to me and I was able to continue with my sanity restored.
[2D collision detection.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Games/Techniques/2D_collision_detection)   

````
var collisionCheck = function(paddle, axis) {
  var widthheight = axis == "x" ? "width" : "height";
  var centerRect = paddle[axis + "pos"] + paddle[widthheight] / 2;
  return Math.abs(ball["center"+axis.toUpperCase()] - centerRect);
 };    

````

  this checks to see how far the paddles and the ball are from each other's center line   

````
  (distXpaddle < (paddleR.width/2 + ball.radius) && distYpaddle < (paddleR.height/2 + ball.radius))
````
####Computer paddle
Anytime you can call something an AI do so!
The AI moves the computer's paddle via this algorithm  

````
  computer.ypos = ball.centerY-speedComp;
````

  that's all

  ####Score & game over &  sounds
  had to watch for gamePlaying
  originally set to false
  sets to true when the key listener event is triggered
  set to flase again when score reaches 11
  becomes false when score gets to 11 and a message is displayed
  score incremetns everytime the ball hits the wall behind the paddle
