---
layout: post
title: Electronica for thinking
feature-img: "img/Dancer.png"
---
Good music to me carries my thoughts. I've expereinced music that picked me up and took me away into a  realm of pure thought , without me even being aware of it until another less qualified piece came on and crashed me back into my oh so real life.

Music can be very helpful while working. But not all music is as effective in keeping me focused. Any lyrics at all are exrtemly distracting. My mind immediately jumps to follow the words. Which reduces my choices greatly.  It's hard to find music that is actually lyrics free. 1920's jazz is an option and has a great dynamic tempo. A little too dynamic tempo.

So the two big contenders are classical and electronica.
Some people seem to love working to classical music. It is suppose to make you smarter after all (or is that just for babies?) and though it is reliably lyric-less I still find it extremely distracting.

Classical music was created for people to listen to actively in those dark days before tv. You were suppose to be pulled in to a musical plot that stimulated the imagination. It has themes and character. Crescendo and much drama to keep you awake and paying attention. You picture horses being driven at breakneck pace or storms on the horyzon, sad rain reminding you of all the things you wish you could undo or magicians working spells.  Yes, my imagination asks for nothing more than to be distracted and classical to me in auditory televison.

Electronica on the other hand is suppose to be lacking in drama. It is ethereal and monotonous to many musicians ears. They deride it as being nothing more than elevator music. And some of it is.
But good electronica helps my mind quickly elevate to it's state of flow and remain there for extended periods of time.  It carries my thoughts lightly without driving anything. It soothes without bringing up the past. It doesn't impose images. It is  like a flying carpet over a quiet landscape.  Finding a good dj is such a relief. I know that with Bonobo on or Nicholas Jaar I have hours of focused attention at my disposition and It will be easy.
